Solitude
Miguel de Unamuno
Translated by John Upton

If I flee from him, you may be sure because of the love I bear him.  By avaoiding him, I seek him.  When he is with me, and I see his face and hear his voice, I should like to blot our his glance and strike him mute forever; but when I leave him and am alone with myself, in the dark abyss of my consciousness I see two wavering points of light like two stars in the fathomless darkness, and in the silence I hear distant, muffled sounds from out of the infinite, which never seems quite to reach me.  They are his eyes; they are his words: his eyes purified by absence and distance, his words cleansed by his stillness.  And this is why I flee from him in order to find him, and why I avoid him because I love him.

When love is pure and noble, it grows with distance.  I feel his sould nearest me when his body is away.  When he departs, he leaves me his soul in his words and in his glance; and he himself lives and grows within me.

my love for the crowd is what drives me to avoid it.  by running from it, I try to find it.  Don't call me a misanthrope.  Misanthropes search out company and conversation; they need other human beings to nurture their hate and contempt.  Love can live in memories and hope; hate needs the reality of the moment.

Then let me fly from society and take refuge in the tranquility of the fields, finding the companionship of men there in my soul.

Men find themselves truely brothers only when they listen to one another in the silences, in solitude.  Your poor neighbor's half-suppressed cry of pain strikes more deeply into your heart when you hear it through the wall that separates you, than would all his weeping if he were standing before you.  I shall never forget a night I spent at a bathing resort when I was kept awake until dawn by a faint, periodic sobbing, a muffled flood of tears, as though the sufferer were trying not to disturb those sleeping about him; a soft, discreet weeping that came to me from the next room.  That grief - whose it was I never knew - had lost all personality; I began to believe that it sprang from the stillness of the night itself, that it was the night that was grieving; for a moment I even wondered if it came from the depths of my own soul.

The next day I left with no attempt to learn who the suffering neighbor was, or the source of his sorrow.  I think I have not pitied another human being so much.

Only solitude can melt that thick crust of modesty that isolates us one from the other; only in solitude can we find ourselves; and when we find ourselves, we find in ourselves all our brothers in solitude.  Believe me, society separates us just as solitude unites us.  If we do not know how to love each other, it is because we do not know how to be alone.

Only in solitude, when the shell that shuts us off from each other and from God is dissolved, can we have no secrets from God.  Only in solitude can we raise our hearts to the level of the Heart of the Universe.  Only in solitude can the redeeming hymn of the supreme confession spring from our soul.

There is no truer dialogue than that which you strike up with sourself; and it is a dialogue that can be uttered only if you are alone.  In solitude and only in solitude can you know yoursself as a neighbor; and as long as you do not know yourself as a neighbor, you will never be able to see in your neighbor another self.  If you want to learn to love the minds of others, withdraw into your own.

Why converse with the rest? There are no real dialogues, because the conversations which fit that discription are those which are not worth remembering.  Almost all of what we call dialogue, when it is lively and leaves us with an imperishable memory, is nothing but interwoven monologue.  You interrupt your monologue so that your interlocutor can resume his; and when he breaks off his monologue, you can take up yours again.  Thus it is and thus it should be.  

Thus it should be.  It would be better if all our speech were monologic - a dialogue with God, in which we prayed day after day and minute after minute, each his own litany, so that our sevaral prayers would mingle into oneas they ascended heavenward, and would reach His eternal and infinite ears as a single orison.  It would be the perpetual monologue of poor afflicted humanity.  and from the bosom of God the prayer would return to us; the voice of God in our hearts, eachoing the peaceful silence, is only the voice of the centuries and the utterance of man.  Our inner life, our life in solitude, is a dialogue with all men.

In the same way, the humble flower that vaporizes and returns aloft the dew that has fallen upon it from the sky receives again in exchange a celestial drop of the liquor that has risen heavenward from all the flowers.

You accuse me of not taking interest in the anxieties of mankind.  The truth is exactly the contrary.  I am convinced that there is only one anxiety, one alone and the same for all men; I never feel this more deeply than when I am most alone.  Everyday I believe less in the social question, the political question, the aesthetic question, the moral question, the religious question, and all the other questions men have invented in order to avoid facing squarely the one real question: the human question, which is mine and yours and everybody's.

Since I know that you are going to say I am playing with words, and are going to ask me what I mean by the human question, I shall have to tell you once more: the human question is the question of what is to become of my conciousness, yours, the other man's, everybody's, when each of us dies.  Any consideration that does not face this question is simply a noice we make to keep from hearing ourselves.  This is why we live in such dread of solitude and seek the company of other men.

We pursue society only to escape from ourselves; and since each of us is avoiding himself, those who join together in social intercourse are only empty shadows and miserable specters.  When they are together, men discuss only their fears and anxieties, emptying themselves; thus they are never more alone than when they are gathered together, and are never more together than when they are apart.

If you only knew how much I owe to sweet solitude!  If you only knew how much my affection for you has grown there; and how the words you pour into my soul in the brief hours of our interviews become sweeter and more inportant there, growing sweeter because of their deeper meaning and taking on meaning bacuse of their growing sweetness!

When you speack to me your voice crashes in my ears and breaks the continual monody of my thoughts; your face gets in the way between my eyes and the familiar shapes they are regarding.  But sa soon as you have gone, your words come back to me, this time from the depths of my own being, incorporated into the chant of my own thought, beating in the same rhythm like an accompaniment.  And behind your voice appears your so familiar face, softened by the undying distance.

Go to solitude, I beg you; for the love of God, isolate yourself.  Isolate yourself, because for a long time I have been wanting to talk with you alone.  

Men concern me so, and my heart beats so heavily when I hear their perennial cries of pain, that I cannot bear to see a play in a theater.  It seems to me nothing but lies.  I cannot listen to one man speaking with another, especially before an audience.  I must hear him alone, when he speaks with himself.

Someone has said he would like to have heard the conversation between Cain and Abel, and to have witnessed the scene that preceded Abel's murder.  Not I.  I should have turned away in horror and disgust.  Cain's envy would have struck me just as false and insincere as Abel's innocence.  I should like to hear Cain alone, when he was not faced with his brother; or I should like to have heard him later, when he has been cursed by God, saying to God - that is, saying to himself, "My punishment is greater than I can bear: Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth; and from thy face shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pass that everyone that findeth me shall slay me." (Genesis IV, 13-14.)  And for me to hear him say even this much, he would have had to be unaware of my presence - otherwise he would have lied to me.  I should like to hear only the solitary cries of pain from the hearts of others...

In the same way that I have always scorned the theater, to the point of hardly ever setting foot in it, I have wished as times that I could enter a confessional to hear the unburdeing of the sins and sorrows of a fellow-being.  But I don't think I could stand that, either; because the confessional becomes a theater, and what goes on in it is nothing but histrionics.  He who goes there to lighten his load of sin inevitably lies, whether he wants to or not and whether he knows this or not.  He probably wants to tell the truth and believes he is telling the truth - when he does want to and when he does believe it - but he does not tell it.  Either he forgives himself without being forgiven, or he blames himself when he is blameless.  Either he fails to tell what he has done, or he confesses something he has not done.  He will not confess simply and honestly his thoughts and actions; he is going to indict himself.  And he who indicts himself lies just as certainly as he who exonorates himself.

This is why, annoyed with the theater and finding no consolation or delight in dramatics, I take refuge in lyric poetry.  For here no one ever lies, although he may set out to do so.

Since I cannot hear the truth when one man speaks with another, nor when he speaks to me, I retreat to my solitude; there alone, listening to my heart, I can hear all men speak the truth.  I know our secrets because you told them to me when you were alone, when we could not see or hear each other.  I heard them in the distant, muffled echo of those lying words you poured into my heart.  Your lies were dissipated in the gross vibrations of the material air that carried them to my corporeal ear; only your naked truth remained when you left my presence.

The greatest of men is the poet - the lyric poet, that is: the true poet.  The poet keeps no secrets in his heart from God; and when he sings his grief, his fears, his hopes, and his memories, he strips and cleanses them of lies.  His singing is your singing - and mine.

Have you ever heard more profound, intimate or enduring poetry than that of the Psalms?  And the Psalms were meant to be sung when one is alone.  I know they are chanted by crowds gathered under a single roof for religious services; but those who intone them are no longer members of a multitude.  When one sings them, he withdraws into himself; the voices of the others resound in his ears only as an accompaniment and reinforcement of his own voice.

I notice this difference between a crowd gathered to recite the Psalms and one brought together to see a play or hear a speaker: The firs is a true society, a company of living souls, wherein each exists and subsists separately; the second is a shapeless mass, and each member of it only a fragment of the human swarm.

I have never felt the urge to move multitude and influence a great mass of people - who, by amassing, lose their personalities; on the other hand, I have always had a tremendous desire to move the individual human heart and to influence each of my brothers in humanity.  When I have spoken in public I have always tried to be lyrical in my oratory; I have tried to pretend that I was addressing a single member of my audience - any one of them, rather than all of them.

The great comforters of humanity, who give us the balm of their inexhaustible love, are the great recluses who retired to the desert to listen to the heart-rending lamentations of the pitiful human flock, lost without sheperd or dog in the desolate wasteland of existence.

During one of these frequent and violent strikes that occur these days, go up to that blessed mountains where you and I so often met in the presence of God, united in our solitude, and watch from there the movements of the infuriated crowd.  Perhaps faint echos of gunshots will reach your ears.  From that vantage point, from where people seem like faceless and voiceless ants, you will come to understand best the spring that moves them and which they themselves are not aware of.  If you were in their midst, you would suppose that they were moved by hunger, or hate, or envy, or the desire for liberty, of the thirst for justice; but from the top of our mountain you will see that they are impelled by the unique eternal anxiety.

No doubt you remember our comments that afternoon when from the mountain top we watched several couples dancing in the town square far below us; because of the adverse direction of the wind, the sound of the drum and flute to which they moved did not reach us.  It is a common observation, and yet one that is always new, that to a deaf person, we who talk and gesticulate and listen carefully to each other may seem insane.  It is the sound of the voice that creates the illusion of rationality.  I suspect, on the other hand, that a blind man does not perceive how apparently mad we are.

From a distance, men seem to be what they really are: creatures who dance and jump about in a meaningless way, stamping on the poor earth.  We are amused at anyone who dances when no one is playing the flute; but how can we know what music he is listening to in the silence of his soul?

The real recluse dances in the center of the market place in the sight of all his brothers, to the sound of the music of the heavenly spheres shich he alone, by virtue of the solitude in which he lives, can hear.  The passer-by stop and watch him for a moment, shrug their shoulders, and go on their way dismissing him as crazy; or they form a ring around him and laugh; or they begin to accompany his dance, clapping their hands in glee.

Now I shall answer what you said not long ago in one of your letters. "You have begun to limp," you said.  "You have begun to dance to the tune they play for you.  You no longer belong to yourselfe; you belong to the crowd.  Remember your advice long ago: 'Never say: Of that water shall I never drink.'"

Well, you are wrong.  I used to dance to the music that only I could hear.  Some laughed at me; others call me mad or eccentric or a publicity seeker; some insulted me; some stoned me; and they went on their way.  Of my audience there remained only a few who were amused by my leaps and pirouettes; and they bagan to dance themselves, shaking the numbness out of their legs.  And this little circle of mine, thank God, has been widening; today I dance and leap at the center of a small crowd of people who clap for me.  When they see me dance without music - for they do not hear the rhythms my feet are obeying - they keep the beat for mewith their hands; and since their clapping is in time with my skips and capers, they believe that I dance to their tempo.  THis make them clap more widely; they cry, "Bravo! See how we make this small man dance!"  They are unaware that I do not even hear their clapping, and if I whirl faster when they applaud faster, it is bacause they clap to my dancing, rather than bacause I dance to their clapping.  And this is the advantage of dancing alone.

We men are impenetrable.  Our minds, like our solid bodies, can communicate only by surface contact.  They cannot interpenetrate, much less bend together.

You have heard me say a thousand times that most minds seem to be exoskeletal, like crustaceans; they carry the bone outside and the flesh inside.  When I read in some book or other how painful and terrible it would be for a human soul to be imprisoned in the body of a crab, and to be forced to use the crab's senses and organs, I thought: "This happens in reality: we are all poor crabs, trapped within a hard shell."

The poet is one whose flesh has come out of his shell; his soul exudes.  When our souls emerge in moments of grief or joy, we are all poets.

Now you can see why I believe it is necessary to agitate the masses of men, to winnow them, to stir them up, and to hurl them against each other; it is to see if in that way their shells can be cracked, so that their souls may spill out and mingle and solidify into the true collective spirit which is the soul of humanity.

Sadly enough, all past experience shows that these collisions, instead of fracturing shells, simply harden them.  Like calluses, they grow tougher and thicker with friction.  Although perhaps the collisions have not been violent enough.  In any case, impact, and not friction, is our only hope.  I do not like to rub against people, but to strike them.  Rather than approaching them abliquely and glancing off at a tangent, I want to meet them head-on and, if possible, split them down the middle.  It is the best service you can do them.  And there is no better preparation for this labor than solitude.

It is sad to reflect that we can communicate only by touch or, at most, by rubbing; and that all human contact must be through some carapace that imprisons each of us.  I believe that in solitude that carapace softens and becomes a tenuous membrane, capable of osmosis and exosmosis.  This is why I say that it is solitude that makes men really sociable and human.

Some of us believe that man's goal is the creation of society - humanity itself; and that all our urges and strivings are aimed toward the day when the human race shall be a single organism, a kind of immense collective animal in which each man will be a cell - a spiritual madrepore.  The end of man, then, would be humanity.

If this view is correct, then when that end has been reached society will recognize that recluses have contributed to its structure more thatn the rest of mankind.  Some anchorite or other in his desert will have done more than all the shepherds of men, who lead their flocks to victory or slaughter.  One does not have to be immersed in humanity to lead it.  You cannot know which of your fellow-beings will have the profoundest influence in your life, but you may be sure it will not be your closest companion.

I have said that for humanity to solidify and take shape, our shells must be broken or dissolved into thin membranes, and that their spiritual contents must escape through the cracks or ooze through the membrane and be mingled together.  Then, when the notions of fools are melted down with those of wise men, and the purposes of scoundrels are fused with those of saints, I believe something grand and pure will result.  Today we know only mixtures of ideas, and not compounds,  If you remember your chemistry, you will recall the distinct difference between a mixture and a compound.  In the relam of ideas and emotions a mixture is pernicious; a compound is not.  Don Quixote and Sancho formed a mixture; but if they had been truly combined, what a portentous personality would have emerged!  It would have been no longer man, but god.

But today we have to live in individual isolation, each within his shell which he cannot fracture -  for these shells must be broken from without.  We are not like baby chick, who as soon as they feel the need for air crack open their prison; someone must free us from outside.  The plaintive cries that reach you in your cell are the moans of  your brother; he, to, is imprisoned and cannot escape from himself.  But if in pity you go to hum and beat on his shell to break and liberate him, he will know only that he is being savagely knocked about; he will groan more piteously and try to push you away.  He has despaired of liberation.  And if you are able to open a crack in his carapace, he will cry out even more when he feels the cold air blowing in.  He will call you barbarous and cruel.  Never mind; hammer away at him.

So perfect is the lamentable isolation in which we live, that now and then a man comes to believe he is alone in the world, surrounded by empty exoskeletons who, by some strange magic, move and speak as though they were filled with lliving spirit.  Out of this profound sense of solitude emerges the intense melancholy of some recluses; and their insights are deeper because of it.

Since I am alone in the world - I say to myself in the moments when this fancy has taken hold of me - I must do all the things there would be no one else to do if I did not exist.  

Don't ou suppose - since I am in the confidential and confessional vein - thet when they have accused me of not being a good Spaniard I have often said to myself: "I am the only Spaniard!  I - not these other men who were born and live in Spain!"

Believing oneself to be alone in the world can wreak terrible havoc in the soul, even pushing it to the edge of lunacy.  I remember a poor fellow who was considered half mad, and who did in fact end as a true monomaniac; He said to me once: "Don Miguel, you have no idea how I suffer from a piece of nonesense I've gotten into my head and can't get out again.  I realized it's a wild notion; I know how rediculous it is, but I can do nothing about it.  It has taken possession of me.  Sometimes I feel so strongly I don't dare leave the house."  "What is it?"  I asked, alarmed by this preamble.  "well," he answered, "there are times when I think I appear to other people as something entirely different from what I am; I have the impression that I'm not behaving as I think I'm behaving, but in some quite contrary fashion.  Right now, for example, I think I'm telling you about my problem; but I have the impression that I'm really insulting you.  When I believe  I'm going down the street in a perfectly dignified manner, I wonder if I'm not making pirouettes and contortions and horrible grimaces; I wonder if the passers-by, although they seem to be paying no attention to me, are not really pointing at me and laughing."

I said to him, "Don't you think more or less the same thing happens to all of us?  I know I have lost valued friendships because when I was saying one thing my friend was hearing something quite contrary.  When I notice a coolness toward me in someperson to whom I am not aware of having done any harm, I think: It must be something I said unawares."

This experience must of neccessity come to anyone who lives with his heart in his hand and speaks from his soul.  It will always happen to him who has a membrane instead of a carapace.  Because most people people, when thye discuss another, keep in mind that they are being listened to; so they lie.  If they are speaking of a friend, they pass over his defects and exaggerate virtues; if an enemy, they depreciate his excelences and dwell on his shortcomings.  If you make an attempt to be truthfull - if, speaking with affection and respect of a friend whom you love, you mention his faults - only the report of your vituperative slander will reach him.

This sort of thing is quite evident here in the city where I live, where I have encountered the thickest and horniest carapaces I have ever seen.  For a spiritual crustacen, there is no one to match the Castilian.  You may be on intimate terms with him for years; but you will have no idea wether he has ever wept in his life, or why.  They are all one piece.  They understand everything in one piece.  They are incapable of perceiving shades of meaning, or the concept of transition, or, least of all, the notion of the slightest understanding of their enemies.  For them, what is not white is black.  And what a genius they have for never getting anything right!  And since they are gossips and tale-bearers and trouble-makers, one can never feel at ease with them.  I can safely say that out of twenty-two accusations they may bring against me, eighteen are lies and the other two are exxagerations.

Since I am willing to confide in anyone, some of these Castilians charge me with treating everyone equally, making no distinction between those who are my friends and those who are not.  No, to me all men are my brothers; I believe that any brother is worthy of my confidences.  I do not feel I can be responsible for the use they make of my secrets.  But the Castilians - the real crustaceans - confide in no one; I sometimes wonder if they have anything to confide.  Their reserve is simply an internal emptiness.  Os, obviously, when they congregate, it can be only to play cards or to malign their neighbors.

An environment of this kind creates a profound sense of solitude.  I regret that my profession preents me from surrounding and protecting this inner solitude with an outer one, I should like really to isolate myself, to retire to a desert - not for forty days but for forty months.  There I would devote my days to the manufacture of a gigantic mace, bristling with iron spikes; I would harden it in the fire and try it against the boulders.  When I had a weapon that satisfied me, I would return to the world with it in my hand and begin to shatter these poor crustaceans right and left, to see what they are like inside.

But here a question occurs to me: Are these shells broken from the outside or from the inside?  I said earlier that they can be cracked only from the outside; that someone has to come along and break them for us.  But I think I spoke rashly; it is not such a simple matter.  It involves the gravest and most profound ethical and religious question: wether man must redeem himself or be redeemed; wether his duty is to break his own chains or to stumble in his shackles to free his neighbor.

If you think about it, the truth of the matter seem to lie in a combination of both points of view: the carapace mustbe splintered from the outside and from the inside at the same time.  You go to liberate your brother because you hear him trying to escape; perhaps you hear his moans.  The desire for freedom is the beginning of liberty.  And when he feels you working to free him, he redoubles his efforts to free himself; and you redouble yours.  You hear him scratching at the wall of his prison, and he hears you hammering on the other side.  At the sound of your blows, he pounds harder; then you pound harder; then he pounds harder.  Both of you - he from within, you from without - are working toward the same end.  And most comforting of all, you pound on his shell with your own and he hammers on your spirit with his; so that both of you benefit.  All redemption, then, is mutual.

This is what is meant by the power of example.  I am not strong enough to pick up each of my fellow men, lift him over my head, and throw him to the opposite bank of the river; but I hope that if men see me throw one of them across, they may say, "He is only a man like ourselves; if he can do it, so can we."

The value of great recluses is that they teach the rest of humanity the power of solitude and the fact that one can live very well alone.  If another man can live in himself and by himself, you can too.  The anchorite, far from despising his fellows, seem to exhort them: "Be men!".  He who insults a
